Hello, everybody.
I'm Chris Engelhardt, and I'm a Senior Data and AI Operations Manager at Gen Re.
At Gen Re, I work on a lot of cool and interesting challenges.
I oversee building and deploying custom AI applications and infrastructure,
as well as overseeing our global analytics and data science platform, which runs on Posit.
Today, I'm excited to talk to you about bringing my background in social and personality psychology
to how I lead data science and AI teams.
Before diving into this topic, though, I want to take you back to 2005,
when Nokia was at the peak of innovation, as evidenced here by the N95 model.
And as reported in a case study, Nokia soon had some challenges
because there was a new competitor in the landscape.
Apple had just introduced in 2007 their first iPhone OS
with a sleek touchscreen, which Nokia did not have.
And obviously, there was some amount of concern going on at this point,
especially among senior leadership.
They were putting a lot of pressure on lower-level managers to deliver in a timely fashion.
And what senior leadership was not interested in
was hearing negative news about meeting deadlines,
or the current status of products.
And ultimately, this stifled innovation and led to Nokia's downfall,
at least over the 2005 to 2010 period.
What I want each of you in the audience to do at this point
is to put yourself in the shoes of a Nokia manager.
And imagine if you worked in a team where you were afraid to speak up.
Imagine if you were on a team where no matter what you thought,
no matter what you did,
would be met with belittlement or beratement.
Imagine if your voice didn't matter.
Imagine if your lived experiences didn't matter, your mistakes and all.
What would the outcome of that look like?
Well, I think it can lead to some pretty negative consequences
as a direct result of not being able to speak up.
One, of course, and this was evidenced in the Nokia case study,
is that there's information asymmetry.
So managers who were on a lower level
had access to different information, i.e. negative news,
that senior leadership did not have access to.
I think also it led to a certain amount of learned helplessness
in the Nokia organization,
where the idea here is that no matter what you do,
it doesn't matter, you feel powerless to affect some change
and change the current state of your situation.
Taken together with information asymmetry
combined with learned helplessness,
I think it ultimately leads to poor team performance.
And we saw this in the Nokia example as well.
And it has some pretty dramatic consequences as a result as well,
both on individuals' mental health,
but also on organizational consequences as well.
And this is a challenge.
And we need a way to address this challenge as a leader.
One strategy that I would submit to you all today
is to think about addressing this challenge
through the lens of psychological safety.
Where the idea here is that the teammates believe,
so this is a team-level construct,
it's where the teammates believe that the team is safe
for interpersonal risk-taking.
By interpersonal risk-taking,
I mean that the team feels free to speak up,
to offer their unique ideas and contributions,
to admit their mistakes and faults,
and ask for help.
And these are challenging things to do,
because each of their own in isolation can lead to
perhaps other people perceiving you as incompetent
or not an effective teammate.
So there's an inherent risk in each of these behaviors.
What I want to do is talk about our journey
on our team and psychological safety.
And the start of our journey began about a year ago,
where I presented to our team on this concept,
as well as the empirical evidence supporting it.
So I drew on Amy Edmondson's work back in the 90s.
And in her work, the earlier study,
she focused on furniture manufacturing companies,
not among technical teams.
And so I thought if I wanted a great chance
of getting the architects and engineers
and data scientists on board with my messaging,
I also had to present something on evidence
among technical teams.
And who better to turn to for that than Google?
As some of you may know,
Google spends millions of dollars
on investigating teamwork,
what makes some teams underperform versus overperform.
And they actually ran a study back in 2012 to 2014
examining this exact phenomenon.
So they included nearly 200 teams,
many of which were technical in nature,
and they asked them a variety of questions.
A lot focused on individual differences.
Does it matter how introverted versus extroverted you are?
Does it matter if you socialize on the weekend
with your teammates?
Does it matter your academic pedigree?
Does it not matter?
What matters is how people work together as a team.
I want to draw your attention
to the bottom of this pyramid here,
where of course they identified a few factors that matter,
but chief among them in importance
is psychological safety,
where again the idea is that teammates feel safe
to take interpersonal risks
and be vulnerable in front of one another.
I wanted to model the types of behaviors
that I want our team to espouse as well.
And I immediately asked for help.
And the help that I asked for is
how do we sustain psychological safety on our team?
One unique idea that was brought forward during this time,
and this is admittedly two words
you don't see together very often.
We hosted a team anxiety party.
Where we started off in this meeting
with the fears that we all have,
just to get the ball rolling.
So I shared that I have an irrational fear
of getting stuck at the top of a roller coaster.
And I love roller coasters,
but I have an irrational fear of getting stuck at the top.
And I also have a really strong fear of bees.
So if you see me one day stuck at the top of a roller coaster
surrounded by bees, rest assured,
I'm not living my best life in that moment.
But there was a surprising amount of overlap
in the fears that we all had.
And it was a very, very powerful and unique team experience.
And I would recommend it.
It's a qualitatively interesting experience,
really powerful that I think genuinely brought us together as a team.
What I want to do now is fast forward to where we're at today,
which is in the middle of our journey.
And I think we'll be here in perpetuity
because we are an imperfect team striving for perfection.
So what can we do to ask for help?
And two ways that I recently asked for help is
in each one-on-one that I have with direct reports or others on the team,
I ask them a very pointed question,
which is, what is one thing we can do today to improve as a team?
And I know that our teammates are really thoughtful
about what they bring forward during that time.
There's a significant amount of reflection
in what is one incremental thing we can do,
what's one action or behavior we can take
to support this talk, believe it or not.
And I ask for their help in helping me prep
for this very presentation that you're seeing here.
So what you'll hear in the next few slides are our teammates' voices,
which is exactly what I think you all should hear in this talk.
When I first joined Genry back in 2022,
we were a team of three, including me.
And today, a mere three years later,
we're approaching 25.
So we've had some significant growth
and with that, some challenges with that growth.
And what we do every two weeks is we have a lot of meetings
that are focused around developer productivity.
We talk about the development efforts.
In these Agile ceremonies, we talk about the current state
and what's going on and what's next.
And two changes to these ceremonies.
One change that was brought forth by one of our teammates
was to split those ceremonies or developer meetings by AI product.
Another suggestion was to align those ceremonies
with the company objectives so that way people could see
visually how the work that they're doing
aligns with overall company objectives.
My takeaway from here is to enable people
to do what they do best.
And if you're a developer, what you're doing best
is probably not sitting idly in meetings.
You want to be hands-on, developing some artifacts.
And to have focus on how and why their work matters
so they can see the meaning and the value
of their overall organizational goals.
I'm sure none of you have been in this position.
But we sometimes will work with vendors that from time to time
will guarantee off-the-shelf solutions
to solve all of the challenges that we have
in a particular use case.
While you might not have experienced that, we certainly have.
And what we had to do in that scenario
was to empathize with the users.
Validate their emotions, right?
Or promise something where the solution could not deliver on it.
So we created more of a collaborative environment.
We sat side-by-side with individuals across business
and worked through their specific use case.
And the end result of this, I think, is that it improved trust
among our stakeholders and accelerated the development process
that we had for them.
And as some of you are aware, of course, empathy matters.
Putting yourself in the shoes of your stakeholders
and building and establishing their trust.
I also want to highlight here
how we've thought about asking for help.
Because it's not necessarily when you hit a wall
you just immediately go and ask somebody to solve it for you.
And that's because I also want to empower our team
to experiment, to fail, perhaps even multiple times.
But importantly, to learn through that process.
And asking for help is never guilted.
It's never shamed. It's never belittled.
It's never berated, importantly.
But, you know, I was in this position once, too.
I loved having the aha moment.
Where I've been perseverating on a challenge for days or weeks
and then all of a sudden, out of nowhere, perhaps in a dream,
the solution comes to you.
And you have that very special, euphoric aha moment.
And there are few things like that in this world.
So while I don't want to take that opportunity away from people,
I want to make sure that people know
that they have help when needed.
I next want to turn to psychological safety
and some of the key results that we've achieved as a result of it.
Starting first with what we call an AI framework.
And an AI framework is an opinionated approach
to how we orchestrate back-end services
to make AI applications realized for our business.
And this foundational layer is reused
across multiple applications because it's modular in nature.
And it supports today three applications
that we have running in production.
We've also developed some internal genry packages
that wrap AI services.
So that way folks who are developing with R or Python
can use these in a genry-approved way.
We also do some cool things within here as well,
like mock testing and prompt caching.
Additionally, we also have implemented work
at the intersection of Azure Databricks,
which is a big data compute environment,
remote compute environment.
Unity Catalog, which can be used for the management
and governance of data sources,
as well as the Azure Data Lake for storage.
If you've ever thought that it's always easy
to write to the Data Lake, you would be wrong.
Especially when you're at the intersection
of modern tools and technologies.
And I do want to give a shout-out to Edgar Ruiz
for his own interesting capabilities with Posit Connect,
which is the content hosting platform
developed and deployed by Posit,
where we offer capabilities to our external clients
in the service of facilitating initial
underwriting decisions.
And this process alone has helped our clients
save about 600 human hours per year.
In closing, the takeaway for me here
is that psychological safety is not a luxury.
It's the foundational piece
upon which high-performing teams are built.
To empower people to speak up,
to empower people to admit their mistakes,
to admit their faults, to be a genuine person
and to be themselves, bring who you are to work.
And I think as a leader,
what you would want to know about
is what can I do today
to help create a high-performing team?
And what I would submit to each of you in here
is that psychological safety
can be a very efficient vehicle
to increase team performance.
Thank you all for your time.
All right. Thank you very much, Chris.
So we have a few questions.
All right. So the first one
is how do you measure psychological safety?
So psychological safety,
if anyone's interested in measuring this on their team,
I would encourage you to go visit any of Amy Edmondson's work.
She has a seven-item Likert scale
that is a reliable and valid measure of psychological safety.
We ourselves on our team
have not directly measured that more than once
where we had in some of our Agile ceremonies,
you know, how safe were people feeling
and people were indeed feeling safe, which is encouraging.
Because, well, people already will know
that that's what I'm intending to measure,
so there could be some response bias in there.
But you can measure this in reliable and valid ways.
And again, I would encourage you to check out
Amy Edmondson's scale on psychological safety.
It's a great, wonderful measure to use.
It's used nearly ubiquitously
in psychological safety research today.
Do you plan to implement more measurements?
So again, I think there's some tricks
with people's expectations to respond in certain ways,
but there definitely are ways that we can capture this,
and we do often have check-ins with the team
on taking a litmus test and how people are feeling and such.
But yeah, definitely could have more of a quantitative focus
on that in the future.
Okay, thank you. We have another question.
So you were in the enviable situation of building a team
from scratch, three people to 25.
How do you start to turn the ship
to make the workplace more psychologically safe?
Right, that's a great question.
And I will admit that taking a bottom-up approach
will be much more challenging than this coming from top-down.
That said, and I've thought about this a little bit,
what I would recommend is talking to your leader
or talking to senior leadership
and asking them this question.
Are you interested in team performance?
Who would disagree with that, right?
So when they say yes, say, well, guess what?
I have exactly the right way to approach this.
So that way you're aligning what they've already just agreed to
to the actual behavior that you can implement.
All right, thank you very much.
A round of applause, please, for Chris.
Thank you all.